When you hear the word “realistic,”
what comes to your mind?
“Realistic” conveys the idea
of something that is practical,
rational, reasonable, and sensible.
Having expectations that are realistic
is essential to joy
and success in Jehovah’s service.
In contrast, unrealistic expectations
cause discouragement,
as Proverbs 13:12 says:
“Expectation postponed makes the heart sick,
but a desire realized is a tree of life.”
Appropriately, we often use this verse
when referring to expectations
that are not achieved
as quickly as we would like.
However, expectations that are too high
can also make our heart sick.
Notice this quote
from the August 8, 1983, issue of  Awake!:
“Disappointment is often not so much a matter
“of ‘expectation postponed,’
“as expectations too high.
“Now at times it is good to have high goals,
“to ‘aim for the stars.’
“But always  expecting to come out on top
is a surefire way to beckon disappointment.”
To avoid disappointment,
our expectations should be
reasonable and sensible.
In our discussion,
we’re going to answer the following
three questions about our expectations:
(1) Why must we be realistic
about what we expect from ourselves?
(2) Why must we be realistic
in what we expect
from our brothers and sisters?
(3) Why is it realistic to expect
that Jehovah will reward us
for our faithful sacred service?
Our first question is,
Why must we be realistic
about what we expect from ourselves?
Of course, we love Jehovah
with our whole heart, mind, and soul,
and we want to do everything for his glory.
However, the reality is
that no matter how much we love Jehovah
and want to obey him,
we are sinful descendants of Adam.
As a result,
we occasionally transgress in thought,
word, and deed.
Ecclesiastes 7:20 states:
“For there is no righteous man on earth
who always does good and never sins.”
And James 3:2 reads:
“For we all stumble many times.
“If anyone does not stumble in word,
he is a perfect man.”
Perhaps you can relate
to the feelings of the apostle Paul
at Romans 7:18-20:
“For I know that in me,
“that is, in my flesh,
“there dwells nothing good;
“for I have the desire to do what is fine
“but not the ability to carry it out.
“For I do not do the good that I wish,
“but the bad that I do not wish
“is what I practice.
“If, then, I do what I do not wish,
“I am no longer the one carrying it out,
but it is the sin dwelling in me.”
Paul’s struggle with his sinful flesh
made him feel miserable.
At times,
we too might feel dejected,
disappointed,
and frustrated over our shortcomings.
We may begin to feel like a failure.
What enabled Paul to continue
serving Jehovah with joy and zeal?
He honestly acknowledged his sinful condition
and had complete confidence
in the ransom sacrifice of Jesus Christ.
Paul went on to say at Romans 7:24, 25:
“Miserable man that I am!
“Who will rescue me
“from the body undergoing this death?
Thanks to God through Jesus Christ our Lord!”
Yes, through Jehovah’s undeserved kindness
and his loving provision of the ransom,
we can confidently remain in Jehovah’s love
and render worship that’s acceptable to him,
even in our imperfect state.
How powerful is the ransom
in allowing us to have a clean conscience
and retain Jehovah’s approval?
Acts 3:19 answers this question:
“Repent, therefore,
“and turn around so as to get your sins
“blotted out,
so that seasons of refreshing
may come from Jehovah himself.”
The original-language word
translated “blotted out”
means “to cause to disappear by wiping,”
“to remove so as to leave no trace.”
Jehovah completely wipes out our sin.
To illustrate:
Imagine a white writing surface
representing our clean standing
before Jehovah.
Now imagine that red dots are drawn on it,
representing our sins.
We should not view the ransom
as if Jehovah draws an  X
over each dot to cross them out.
Those red dots would still be visible.
Rather, we should imagine Jehovah,
based on the ransom,
completely erasing the red dots
so that a clean,
white writing surface is restored.
Jehovah further reassures us
of the completeness of his forgiveness
with the words recorded at Psalm 103:12-14.
Jehovah ‘remembers that we are dust’
and does not expect perfection from us.
As a merciful Father,
he puts our sins “as far off
as the sunrise is from the sunset.”
Even if a servant of Jehovah
commits a serious sin,
if he is truly repentant with godly sadness,
his sin can be blotted out,
completely forgiven.
Therefore, it is essential for us to maintain
a reasonable, sensible,
realistic view of our imperfect state.
We’re going to make mistakes,
but we must have full trust in the reality
of Jehovah’s forgiveness based on the ransom.
Also, we can learn valuable lessons
from our errors
so that we’ll be less likely to repeat them.
We need patience, though,
because some personality flaws and bad habits
may not go away overnight.
Some of them may even be a lifelong battle.
At times, we may need counsel and discipline.
What should we realistically expect
when receiving discipline?
Hebrews 12:11-13
makes it clear
that initially it will not “be joyous.”
“It is painful”!
However, when we humbly accept discipline
and apply the counsel,
we can be sure that we will gain inner peace
and be a better servant of Jehovah.
Therefore, do not give up,
but keep making progress.
Never allow the Devil
to convince you that you are a failure.
As stated in the September 1, 2001,
issue of  The Watchtower,  on page 18:
“Satan would like nothing better
than to rob you of your peace . . . .
“He would surely like you
to feel that your imperfection
“makes your service unacceptable to God.
Never allow the Devil to demoralize you!”
Our second question for consideration is,
Why must we be realistic
in what we expect
from our brothers and sisters?
Just as it’s essential
to avoid having expectations
that are too high for ourselves,
we must also avoid expecting too much
from our brothers and sisters.
Such unreasonable expectations create stress,
disappointment, and frustration.
The  Awake!  of September 8, 1994,
quoted a factory supervisor who said:
“You have to accept people as they are.
“If you expect more than they can give,
“[you] will elevate the stress level,
making everyone unhappy.”
We should expect from our fellow workers
what Jehovah and Jesus expect from them.
Jesus’ illustration of the talents,
recorded in Matthew chapter 25,
conveys their thinking.
The main point of this illustration
is that the Master, Jesus,
expects each of his anointed brothers
—the slaves and, by extension,
those who are of the other sheep—
to do his or her best
in the assigned work
of preaching the good news.
How did Jesus distribute the work?
Matthew 25:15 provides the answer:
“He gave five talents to one,
“two to another,
“and one to still another,
“to each according to his own ability,
and he went abroad.”
Jehovah and Jesus are pleased with
and will reward each of us
when we do our best
within our circumstances and ability.
When the slave with two talents
gained two more,
the master did not say to him,
‘Why did you not gain five more
like your fellow slave?’
He gave the two-talent slave
the same commendation
as the one who was given the five
and gained five more:
“Well done, good and faithful slave!
“You were faithful over a few things.
“I will appoint you over many things.
Enter into the joy of your master.”
As a result,
the two-talent slave
could be just as successful
and joyful as the five-talent slave.
They both met
their master’s reasonable expectations,
and their master was joyful too.
What a fine lesson for all of us,
including those serving as elders!
In imitation of Jehovah and Jesus,
we should never put pressure on our brothers
to do more than they’re capable of doing.
Failure to take this reasonable
and realistic approach
can result in much frustration.
Another way that we show
we have reasonable expectations
is to acknowledge
that from time to time disagreements
and hurt feelings
will arise among our brothers.
Have you ever heard someone say,
“I expect to be treated that way
by the world, but not by my brother”?
Is it reasonable to expect
that there will not be any
difficulties among brothers?
No.
Does Jesus expect that at times
his disciples will have difficulties
among themselves?
Yes.
Why can we say this?
Remember some of the expressions
Jesus used throughout
the Sermon on the Mount:
“Happy are the peacemakers,
since they will be called sons of God.”
“If . . . you are bringing
your gift to the altar
“and there you remember
that your brother has something against you,
“leave your gift there in front of the altar,
and go away.
“First make your peace with your brother,
and then come back and offer your gift.”
“Forgive us our debts,
as we also have forgiven our debtors.”
“Stop judging that you may not be judged.”
These verses show
that Jesus knew his disciples
would have challenges among themselves.
That was a realistic expectation.
But it’s also reasonable
to conclude that these problems
can be successfully resolved
if godly principles are applied.
Then peace can be restored.
Additionally, we should expect some tensions
to arise among the brotherhood today.
But by applying Bible principles,
peace can be restored and maintained.
We’ll now consider our third question:
Why is it realistic to expect
that Jehovah will reward us
for our faithful sacred service?
At Hebrews 11:6,
the Bible tells us that Jehovah
is “the rewarder
of those earnestly seeking him.”
And at 1 Corinthians 15:58,
the apostle Paul encourages us
to have “plenty to do
in the work of the Lord,
knowing that your labor is not in vain.”
Paul was absolutely sure
of his heavenly reward.
Despite his sins
prior to becoming a Christian
and his battles with sinful inclinations,
please note his confidence
expressed at 2 Timothy 4:7, 8:
“I have fought the fine fight,
“I have run the race to the finish,
“I have observed the faith.
“From this time on,
“there is reserved for me
the crown of righteousness,
“which the Lord, the righteous judge,
“will give me as a reward in that day,
“yet not to me only,
but also to all those
who have loved his manifestation.”
We can have similar confidence
in the reward Jehovah has promised,
whether our hope is heavenly
or to enjoy everlasting life
on a paradise earth!
This is a realistic expectation
because our reasonable and loving God
has promised it,
and he does not lie.
Therefore, may we develop
and maintain
realistic expectations for ourselves
and for our fellow workers.
May we never lose sight of the reality
that Jehovah
will reward “those earnestly seeking him.”
If we have realistic expectations,
we can find joy and success
in our service to Jehovah now,
as well as have the prospect
of doing so forever.